Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Sophie Scott Brown. She is a
research fellow at the University of San Andrews and
Future Fellow at Remark Institute in New York. She
is also founder of the Everyday Democracy Project with
Open Society Foundation. And today we're talking about the
history of European political thought, left wing politics in
Europe, anarchism, the enlightenment and liberalism, some other related
topics. So, Sophie, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here. Thank you.
So, uh let us start then with European political
thought. So you yourself, how far back do you
go when studying the history of European political thought?
Or when would you say perhaps it starts or
what are the parts you're most interested in?
Sure. Well, this is a really interesting question, obviously
because I, I stand with a foot in two
camps. So I'm an intellectual historian, but I'm also
a political philosopher. So, um and I know I'm
sure we're gonna talk later a bit more about
the conversation that happens between philosophy, politics and history
um in terms of my sort of historical work
now, obviously, I was taught in the, you know,
at university in the, the sort of standard way.
And generally speaking, you can't get very far in
political philosophy without really um Ancient Greece. You know,
you, you can't, you can't really escape Plato and
Aristotle, but the kind of key founding text that
gave us so many of the very um familiar
normative ideas that we have about what politics is,
how it should be done, who should be doing
it all that sort of thing. So obviously, you
could um if you wanted to do sort of
European political thought, you could be very, very traditional
and conventional and you could start there. Um And
that obviously gives you the foundations for a lot
of ideas that get sort of altered and reiterated
and regenerated over over the generations um in terms
of my own practice. However, I mean, I identified
predominantly as a modern historian and modern is one
of these another wonderfully elastic words. So, although I
tend to focus on 20th century stuff, obviously, I
sort of um follow the threads of that back
into the 18th or the the sort of enlightenment
period and possibly slightly beyond to the things like
the scientific revolution in the kind of late sort
of 17th century type thing, you can do that.
And the reason that you would do that is
because actually a lot of modernity is a very
different set of political and economic conditions which obviously
was very, very, very um different from, from what
they were talking about and having to comprehend in
antiquity and also in the middle and medieval, uh
middle ages, medieval periods. So you've got this wonderful
mishmash of questions that have been asked over and
over again. Um For as long as people have
been getting together, talking about how to organize things.
Um Then you've got a very specific set of
conditions which we now know are the kind of
architecture for what we call modernism, particularly in terms
of economics and politics. So they follow through too.
And then I suppose as a historian, you're busy
weaving all these threads together, seeing how this set
of conditions affect this kind of question. So when
you do the 20th century, you can't do it
in a vacuum. Although um you know, you have
to bring some of that memory back with it,
not necessarily because it is what happened, but it's
actually more important what people believe about the past
and how that motivates them to make the decisions
they do in the present. However, having said all
that, I'm now going to sort of flip it
slightly cos the philosopher, philosopher in me always looks
at history with a little bit of skepticism um
and says, well, actually, yes, it's very useful. What,
what does history do for us? It gives us
context, it gives us a sort of genesis, it
gives us a story to, to feed into, to
orientate ourselves with. But actually history can, can do
a lot, can do a lot more for us
too. As I said, the normal account of politic,
the history of political thought starts in ancient Greece.
And when you do that, you automatically are talking
about how to be a leader, how to have
governments, um, how to have authority. Um, WHY authority
is necessary because it protects us from our worst
instincts about ourselves or why authority is good because
it helps us be our best selves. Those are
the two stories that come out of ancient times
really and travel forward. Now, if you're an anarchist,
that's not very helpful. Um If you're an anarchist
looking for accounts of how in history, we can
show that actually authority isn't always necessary when it
comes to organizing ourselves and splitting up our resources
and making decisions about that. So you might start
elsewhere in history. You might as um Peter Kropotkin
did the uh the Russian scientist, he actually went
back to prehistory. Um How did very, very early
forms of human organization work themselves out? And his
argument was that it's not just about competition and
authority, therefore being necessary to moderate competition, we can
trace a history of human beings being co-operative and
that co-operation being what has helped them the most
to develop and flourish um as a species. Um
There's been some updates to this. So in the
mid uh 20th century, anthropologists got very excited about
tribes finding indigenous peoples who equally had no hierarchical
structures within their cultures. They did have quite um
repressive, shall we say customs or religions? But nevertheless,
they did not have anything that you could equate
to government. More recently, David Graber and David Wenger
have also gone back into prehistory and found examples
of um groups or uh tribal groups that again
didn't need government. So this is another perennial thing.
Perhaps we shouldn't be looking at ancient Greece. Perhaps
we should be looking much further and much more
um broadly. But the final thing I'd say is
just, you know, going back, putting my historian's hat
back on at any moment in time, you, it
depends where you want to train your historian's eye.
Now, if you want to do politics, it feels
natural that you would look to governments, to kings,
to leaders, to emperors, to presidents, to queens, whatever.
But you could, if you were imaginative and inventive
enough, look elsewhere because even if people aren't calling
themselves politicians and don't, aren't calling what they're doing
politics. If they're making decisions about how to live
together and how to split up resources, then they
are effectively being political one way or another, how
they're managing a series or collection of vested interests,
this could be in a purely trivial way in
a sort of in a village, in a family.
So if you're the kind of historian that doesn't
mind being a bit imaginative and a bit creative,
you can find politics in any space in any
time, um in any country at any point. So,
so to answer to, to come back to your,
to your question, where do you start? Where do
you want to?
OK. So there's a lot there, but I will
perhaps put a pin on the bit that you
mentioned with the the that is more related to
anthropology. I mean, Peter Kropotkin and then anthropology and
then you also mentioned David Graber and others. So
uh I will put a pin on that because
later when we talk about the enlightenment and Steven
Pinker take on it and stuff like that, I,
I think that will make for a good segue
into that. Uh But before we get into left
wing and right wing politics, let me just ask
you one more broad question about what you mentioned
there. So do you think that with the advent
of, of modernism, uh the questions we are interested
in asking in political science and political philosophy, it
changed or are they the same? But we have
to answer them in a new set of circumstance?
That's a really good question. Um I think in
some ways, uh So the question being is, so
how much does that change of situation affect the
way we think about politics in some ways very
profoundly? Because if you're talking about inner antiquity. You're
talking about cultures that, you know, the degree to
which you can assure and be assured of con
of the continuation of life is obviously much more
reduced than in modernity. Modernity is sort of defined
by the extent and it's a horrible phrase, but
the extent to which there's been a conquest of
nature so that our lives are much less um
unpredictable, they're much more secure, we can be sure
that we'll, you know, we'll make it through the
winter that we can respond to illnesses and what
have you. Um The further back you go, there's
a precarity, there's a worry, there's a fear. Things
like scarcity are on people's minds constantly that changes
the kind of arguments you can have about politics,
not entirely cos as, as um you know, as
we've been discussing. Um It doesn't mean that uh
just because life's a bit more precarious, you're going
to have to talk about authority and cooperations only
something like you get with the luxury of not
worrying. No, no. As crop Kin was arguing, cooper
operation was a much more sensible strategy for managing
scarcity and precarity. Um So it's not necessarily that
you discount one set of questions in favor of
another, but certainly modernity does change things dramatically in
terms of how we relate to one another. So
the kind of questions that Plato and Aristotle were
thinking about, we carry them with us because we
used to because all of those sort of, if
you think about all the great thinkers of, um,
um all the great theorists, people like Karl Marx
or, you know, Nietzsche or, or Hobbs or, you
know, all of them would have, would have studied
the ancients. And so in some ways, they are
always organizing their thoughts around those ancient questions. Even
if sometimes that means they're not necessarily paying full
attention to the modern facts. I think what I
would sort of, um what I would really think
is striking at this particular moment is the extent
to which that process is really working against us
right now. And actually the kind of questions we're
asking, we're so used to a particular set of
questions and a particular way of asking that we
have ignored for too long, some facts about what
our modern sit situation, our late modern situation. Um
REALLY is, for example, this is the great year
of elections, right? Britain's just had one. It was
the most thrilling non-event I think I've ever witnessed.
Um France bit more exciting, but still we are
actually, we're seeing some really interesting results. We're seeing
people get quite excited about politics, like in France
right now, very excited, a very dramatic result and
yet not a result because ultimately, people are saying,
right, well, it's almost a defensive move. We need
to keep the worst at bay, but we're not
confident that any form of government is really gonna
get us to where we want to be right
now. Um Right now, um we are facing problems
that the standard ways, the standard tools we have
for dealing with things don't work anymore. No single
national government is gonna be able to respond and
react to the kind of modern problems we've got
and by Melbourne problems I'm talking about or what
happens when you have global pandemics. What you know,
how do you join up? How do you coordinate,
how do you, how do you respond to those
effectively emergency? Right. That's something else that you cannot
just centralize in a national government. It doesn't make
sense. It's not how it's going to work and
it's not how it's going to work in the
future. So yeah, your questions bang on right now.
We're too busy asking old questions and we're not
really paying enough attention to present realities.
So, but now because I want to ask you
about left wing politics, what are the actual origins
of the terms left wing and right wing?
Sure. I actually didn't, didn't know until you mentioned
that this was an area you were looking at
and I'm still a bit hazy, but it seems
to have actually been a fairly incidental kind of
usage that originated from the French Assembly during the
kind of revolution. So the the right was sitting
nearer, you know, the the were those that supported
the older regime or the older establishment? And the
left were the ones that wanted, you know, a
bit more radical change a bit quicker and we,
we were sort of more allied to the revolutionary
cause. Um And that seems to have been just
a sort of, kind of a sort of accidental
thing that caught on like these things do sort
of went viral if, if you could go viral
in the 18th century. Uh What's interesting to me
now is just again and it touches back to
your, to your previous question. These terms are so
ubiquitous, they are really quite strong in our minds
and they carry very strong moral loadings as well.
So it could be that, you know, a lot
of us will think automatically. Oh, left are the
goodies, right? Are the baddies equally. We might think,
you know, if we're, we're more inclined towards the
right, the left are irresponsible, we the right are
responsible, but there's strong sort of again, like a
real moral infusion in those ideas and yet how
helpful are they in some ways, what the anarchists
have always done is kind of is respond to
those terms because we have to because they're there
and they're very useful ways to help us organize
our thoughts. But I have actually said, well, you
know what quite often, the anarchists have the same
kind of problems with people on the left and
on the, as they do with people on the
right. So one of the major criticisms against a
figure like Marx, for example, was that he was
very authoritarian, dressed up as a libertarian, but secretly
very authoritarian. So, in some ways left and right,
it, it came into, it came into use kind
of accidentally it stuck around. Um, WE'RE so used
to organizing our political world by it. But is
it actually, um, very useful, is it helping us
right now, or actually, are there other ways to
look at the political landscape like who wants more
control and who wants to lose or give away
more control? Hm.
And do you think it's helping us or not
left and right. I don't think it helps anymore.
I think there might have been a moment where
it was useful, but I think right now what's
really interesting is actually looking underneath those two terms,
like I said, um, so I tend to be
associated with, with the left and that's, and I'm
sure we'll, we'll come to that in more detail
later. But I mean, for me, it's sort of,
um, I think right now it puts us in
an unhelpfully polarized tribal position. I'm on this team,
you're on that team. Um, IT'S not really helping
us discuss the common problems that we have to
face and it's not really allowing for there being
quite significant lines of difference between people who might
all, uh, all agree, for example, on a more
socially driven approach as opposed to people who have
a different approach. And a different point of view.
There are fine, there are very, they're not fine
lines, they're actually strong lines of difference between people
who we would put on either camp. And if
we don't recognize them, we reduce the amount of
tools and resources we have to problem solve because
we just lump people together. And right now we
need as many different ideas as we can get.
Mhm. And also, I don't know if you agree
with this point, but it seems to me that
there's enough evidence to say at least in the
US, but probably in other places that if you
ask just common people on the street, whether they
identify as Democrats or Republicans, in the case of
the US, they tend to agree more or less
with the same social policies just asking common people
on the street. It's just that when we get
into social media and sometimes even mainstream media more
generally and when we get into more intellectual debates,
sometimes things get a little bit more polarized or
apparently more polarized because it seems that common people
just want more or less the same things, better
health, better education, better salaries, stuff like that.
These are social things. I mean, people actually, I
mean, I think the political divides, I think you
make an excellent point there, the political divides mean
something to the politicians because they're the ones playing
the game. But for most people actually, we are
now getting to a point where, um, we don't
have the luxury of, of, you know, it's not
like football, we're not picking our favorite side and,
you know, debating, you know, the, the, the various
strategies, I'll just get that in as the Euros
are on. Um, BUT, uh, right now people have
just, you know, real serious issues just living. Um,
HOW are we gonna live? How are we gonna
deal with the effects of the climate emergency? How
are we gonna deal with much more mobile shifting
populations? How are we gonna deal with cost of
living? And you know, quite frankly, they don't, they
don't care what those people are doing and more
to the point, you know, because we've reached a
stage with our political systems bearing in mind the
extent to which they are all still just reiterating
very old models, models that were kind of formalized
and organized in the sort of 19th century and
are now proving pretty inadequate to dealing with the
kind of problems people are caring about. Um There's
actually very little between them other than maybe style
of presentation. So in Britain, for example, until about
the early 19th century, so throughout the 18th century,
you basically had the whig party, that was it
the wigs, just the whigs and the only division
was that you had some wigs in power and
they were the court wigs and you had some
wigs out of power and they were the country
wigs and the job of the country wigs was
to keep the court ones honest as it were.
Um, AND, and, but basically they were all pretty
much on message, believed the same sort of things
with tiny kind of nuances between them. We've actually
gone far more back to that kind of system
right now. The, the, um, you know, um, that's
possibly more relative, more, um, to the point in
Britain, I do think you're getting in order to
get difference and this is maybe a more pertinent
point for Europe in order to get real difference
from the center ground, which seems to have gobbled
up so much. You are having to really get
massive polarization to the point of ludicrousness between the
two parties. The reason we're seeing a hung situation
in France is because, um, it is actually not
realistic that either the far right or the far
left could run a government because government by definition
is that centrist ground.
So let me pick on something that you just
mentioned earlier. You said, uh, I mean, I'm not
sure if you yourself would identify as a leftist
but you said that people usually place you on
the left. So what does that mean for you?
Exactly. And how would you characterize perhaps the left
wing, uh, today or? I, I mean, the, how
would you, what are the, the aspects of the
left that you identify with yourself?
Sure. Um, I don't think, I mean, I do
still use the term and I would probably position
myself definitely more that way. Although that ends up
getting into trouble quite a lot actually. So people,
um, people assume that, you know, I'm a, I'm
a good, fully paid up leftist person so I
get endless invitations to socialist this or, you know,
kind of this collective, that collective. And I've got
a horrible, I have to confess to you, you
know, exclusive here. I'm not very clubbable as the
phrase goes. So I'm, I'm, I'm generally a bit
bit wary when people say, would you like to
join our collective? I'm like, hm, I'm, I'm, I'll
let, I'll, I'll think about that. Um, BUT, uh,
but nevertheless, it is an important term for me
and I think it's because, I mean, quite often
it, it's, it comes down more and I think
this might, um, segue into, to anarchism. Uh, CO
anarchism is just such a kind of radical rethinking
just in terms of, of how you organize and
describe and discuss politics. It's been really helpful. That's
how I got into it in the first place.
It allowed me to express things that I wasn't
finding the language for anywhere else. And that was
really helpful. Um, FOR me, the reason I suppose
I would still identify with the left is because
I do like, if I'm my primary drive or
commitment is to liberty and I do think that
we, um, get a better quality of liberty and
more security of a better security for our liberty
if we can start from a basis of more
or less sort of, not necessarily complete, you know,
equality but from a decent level playing field where
you don't get, um, excessive extremes. Um, SO I
suppose, to me it's like if you were just
to go off and pursue liberty on that in
that, in that sort of free market sense of
each for their own and good luck to you,
which isn't, you know, entirely without merit as a,
as a, as a, you know, political philosophical idea.
But if you do that, it's always going to
be a, a fairly crap kind of freedom to,
to put it bluntly because if you're in a
competitive um situation, you'll always have one eye over
your shoulder to see who's coming for you and
you will entirely define your freedom according to a
set of status symbols or acquisitions that, you know,
really are not designed to maximize anybody's freedom, they're
maximized. Uh They're designed to ensure that a few
people have a lot of ability to do a
lot of things and a lot of people have
very little ability to do very much. So, I
suppose that's my reason for favoring um, the social
side. Plus I just think actually it's so much
more creative and fun and more interesting honestly to
have more people um standing sort of eye to
eye, shoulder to shoulder, no kind of artificial divisions
or barriers between them and actually challenging ourselves to
see what it is to live with people without
kind of having to resort to um sort of
imaginary barriers for why we shouldn't take someone more
seriously or as seriously as we take ourselves. So
I just think it would lead to a more
interesting life frankly.
So, let's talk now then about anarchism because I
think that probably there are many common misconceptions that
people have about anarchism and many times they equate
anarchism to chaos basically, right? So um w what
would you say are the main tenets of anarchism?
And since you mentioned liberty there, uh do you
think that liberty is also part of it? And
if so how does it manifest specifically in anarchism?
So, um again, great question, anarchism itself. It's quite
simple. The word is, I mean, first words don't
have to be last words, but generally speaking, it's
quite useful just to go back to, well, what
does that word actually mean? What, what, what is
this word? Because anarchist, you, you won't be surprised
to hear are very anarchic. So each of them
will be there an anarchist in their very own
special way. What on earth can bring anyone together
around a collective term? Well, this notion anarchism, which
is basically absence of permanent authority. Now, that's, that's
it, that's kind of all it all it starts
by. Um THAT'S all it's committing you to me.
OK. OK. That's actually enough. That's quite a massive
philosophy in and of itself. All right, cos it,
it opens up so many other questions. So you
mentioned liberty in some ways, I think it this
that position in and of itself just that rejection
of any sort of permanent authority. And I deliberately
use the word permanent because um there are plenty
of forms of anarchism which might accept temporary forms
of leadership, just nothing that becomes institutionalized or permanent.
Um Others, others are, are far more puritanical about
that. But let's, let's just keep flexible for now.
Um If you're not gonna have any sort of
permanent authority, then that kind of automatically puts you
in a position of strong non-interference, which we would
all be familiar from those of us who study
kind of normative political theory, that's the negative definition
of liberty. Um So the idea that, you know,
what we're looking for is uh a position that
maximizes individual freedoms. Um And that's the kind of
fun thing about anarchism for me. So I think
liberty, I think so we've got lack of permanent
authority. So therefore, um this question of a strong
or a maximum amount of in of liberty, um
let's say individual liberty is present. So from that,
that's it, that's, that's all that you're kind of,
you know, that's all you have to sign up
for in order to, to, to be an anarchist.
If you like now, where it gets really fun
is the fact, um, really fun but really complicated
is that after that the kind of positive program,
what kind, what are you gonna do with your
liberty? You know, what, what does it look like?
How does it feel to you? Do you even
want to decide that at all? Um, DO you,
do you have, you know, do you have ideas
about how everyone can get this liberty or do
you think that's not really up to you to
solve? You only need to fight for, you know,
you fight for one individual's liberty and that's enough,
the positive program. Like, what are you gonna do
with it? That is really massively open to interpretation.
One of the things anarchism is criticized for, but
I think you, you can equally see it as
a great strength. So it's simultaneously both is the
fact that it does splinter off into so many
different subcategories. I mean, you only had to go
on Wikipedia for 10 minutes. Um And there's, there's
a narcos socialist, there's narco feminists, there's narco ecologists
and then that, that's just layer one. That's just
your uh da da da second order anarchism, right?
You can have 3rd, 4th, 5th because you can
have, well, I'm an a narco feminist radical socialist,
but only on Wednesday because on Thursday, I'm with
the individualists and you know, you can do that.
It's, it's um you can have so much fun
trying to work out what kind of an anarchist
you are today that you actually never get around
to doing anything, which is the criticism. Um But
nevertheless, I think on a very baseline, you as
an anarchist would always stand up and resist the
idea of any of the further encroachment of any
form of permanent authority on your life. So that's
what would bring us all together at a rally.
Not much else just that.
OK. But with that in mind, let me ask
you, then do you think that anarchism allows for
any form at all of hierarchy? Even if it's
just, let's say a fluid or informal hierarchy, if
it's not someone uh on the top imposing necessarily
things on other people or even restricting their liberty
in any particular way. But just let's say to
orient society, to organize society, something like that.
I'll talk for the kind of anarchism I defend
because I know that plenty of um these sort
of people who identify with anarchist ideas would answer
this, this quite differently. I mean, just to give
you AAA flavor of it, I mean, there would
be some that would say, no, you can actually
um approach society in a way where you'd never
have to have any sort of leadership. I mean,
the anarcho, the, the, the sort of very, very
um purist uh an Arco Communist position, for example,
would say you could structurally design society in a
way that nobody would ever assume positions of, of,
of leadership or authority. Now, my response to that
because I'm not an narco communist, um as we
mentioned, not so fond of joining things. Um But
uh s so my response is that will be
ok, but someone has still had to take the
authority um to decide what that, you know, completely
egalitarian design looks like someone's then got to impose
it. And even if in the long run, we'd
all love it and it would be perfect and
we'd all be so much happier. We might not
in the short term. And that's always a, a
means and an ends question that is important in
anarchism. Like, can you ever force people to be
free? I think the, the, the, the answer, the
anarchist answer for me is no, you can't. Um
So, so yes, uh you can have forms of
anarchism which would completely sort of reject any form
of um authority, leadership, et cetera. I think actually
there's n it's not incompatible with anarchy to say
that there are some, sometimes, actually there are people
who are just, um because I would also rather
work with people than structures or systems. My anarchism's
about taking people seriously and if there's a moment
where there are people who certain groups of people,
certain individuals who are clearly much better suited to,
to lead on something, maybe they know more about
it, maybe they're more confident, um Maybe it's familiar
to them, whatever the reason my problem would be
if that then became permanent and institutionalized. That to
me is a problem because that would mean that
at some point you will have issues that those
people are not the best suited to deal with
and yet they would deal with it at the
expense of others who were more confident, more, more
knowledgeable, et cetera. So I think my version of
anarchism says, um anarchism is, you know, that the
absence of permanent authority should mean that you're able
to negotiate and invent or create the right response
to the situation you find yourself in and not
just gonna continually have to defer to a structure
or to a form of leadership that isn't going
away regardless of whether it's right for right now
or not. So, yeah, that, that, that does lead
me into some tricky ones. I mean, for example,
with the green issue right now, a lot of
people feel that the only way we would get
quick enough along the road to solve our problems.
So do the things that we, we are being
advised we need to do to keep at 1.5
or, or not exceed that too, too excessively that
many people feel. Right. Well, we're just going to
need a kind of green green dictatorship for a
while that we're just gonna have to force these
um measures on people. I'd say no, no, that's
not, that's not what I'm talking about. I do
understand why people would feel that, you know, you,
you need to have more force at some time
time than others. What I would say is right
now, we do need to be giving far more
prominence and far more platforms to the, to people
who really understand what's going, what's going on, environmentally,
ecologically, how that intersects with our lives, our, you
know, the, um the economy, the, our general way
of living society. So it might be that those
people shouldn't, you know, shouldn't always be in the
spotlight forever and ever more, but they need to
be right now.
Mhm. No. Uh, YOU know, one of the reasons
why I asked you that question, I think you
would be open to this kind of evidence, let's
say, because I've talked with many anthropologists on the
show and sometimes about these particular questions. Uh, IS
that, for example, even in more traditional societies like
hunter gatherers, for example, and the more egalitarian ones,
it seems that even if you don't want to
call them necessarily, there's, there's always a few figures
there are, there are that have at least more
authority than most of the other people there. I
mean, in egalitarian societies, of course, they are egalitarian
in terms of resource distribution, let's say. And also
in terms of everyone there being able to have
a voice and participating in decision making. But still
there are always a few figures there. Like, I
don't know, perhaps the best hunter, the, the shaman
and people like that, who in particular areas have
more authority and they also sometimes even participate in
conflict resolution. Like for example, if there's a conflict
between two people, they step in to try to
solve it, they say, OK, so stop it. Let's
talk, let's try to, to solve this according to
our norms here and stuff like that. So, uh,
I mean, what I'm trying to say with this
is that, uh I, I'm, I'm not completely close
to the possibility of we having a society with
no authority and lo no leadership at all. But
it's just that even in those more egalitarian traditional
societies, it's II, I don't think that there's anyone
out, any of those is out there where you
can't find any sort of authority or leadership at
all.
I think you're right. And there are two ideas
of what you've just said has sort of, um
um reminded me of or, or spark or sparked
to me. Uh I think firstly, what's, what, what
I'm really interested in is, is that authority which
is so responsive to the moment. I think a
lot of my problem. And I think again, this
goes back to our, our issue with antiquity and
why philosophers like Plato and Aristotle, they seemed to
always want to. Well, not, not Aristotle actually. Well,
he's, he's a different, oh, bracket Aristotle. But now
Plato, certainly there's a timelessness about Plato wanting to
transcend the moment, the, the kind of messy, right,
what's happening right now in the present, always looking
outward, you know, to this sort of um universal,
timeless perfection and, and, you know, that's the instinct
to strive towards it actually, what, what you're describing
about with the kind of, um, sort of uh
egalitarian type tribes or even non egalitarian, whether they
would see themselves that way. Who knows? Um, BUT
it's that complete attention to the present and people
being able to command a certain amount of, you
might call it authority. You might just call it
sort of compelling presence or perhaps certain people resonate
more at different times than others because they are
so responsive to the moment. And I think we've
been so busy trying to pursue and, and maybe
a lot and political science, uh does this an
awful lot, you know, in terms of trying to
kind of, if we get this perfect theory of
how power works and how to do it, we
can almost uncouple ourselves from context from time and
place. And I feel that whenever you try and
make power or authority permanent, what you're basically trying
to do is outrun the world outrun time inspector
and you can't. Um And that, that's what makes
it toxic. That's what makes it, um, um a
problem. So actually there's no problem at all for
me having sort of people who emerge and they
say things that click, they might not. It's not
necessarily about, they have the answers to our questions,
but they give us tools that allow us to
do things that get us closer to, to feeling
more comfortable, safer. Um, YOU know, and, and that
can be a really, that can be a wonderful
thing if, if they are truly sincerely, you know,
sort of true experts and true, have true understanding
or, or have true compassion, maybe that's the correct
word. But it can also, you know, because we're
so desperate because we are so desperate for those
voices who are actually listening to our problems and
responding back to them that actually we're finding people
who have not got the full compassion, the full
understanding, but who are going through the motions of
responding to people, people's wishes. And that's, well, basically,
I'm, I'm, I'm talking about the rise of right
wing populism here. Um It's very easy for those
and get me back to our left and right
um here. But it's very easy for those on
the broader left, shall we say to, to be
horrified, are mystified by the rise of right wing
poli uh politics across Europe um across the world
and say, how is this happening? How is this
happening? Does this mean that apart from this small
relative minority of intellectual elites, that actually everyone's just
a sort of closet fascist waiting to break out?
No, it doesn't. It means that what those people
on the right, whether it's totally cynical and strategic
or whether actually it comes from some kind of
genuine attempt to identify with, with human, very human
fears and insecurities, what they're doing is they're saying
your politics isn't listening. We're listening, we're listening and,
and we're gonna respond to what you're frightened about.
They're not gonna do it in an open minded,
compassionate, you know, um, way particularly they're gonna do
it for their own gain. But nevertheless, it's something
they're doing that that maybe the other side, the
other big um political players are not um doing
but, but returning to your, to your, to the
issue about um so that just sort of maybe
addresses that kind of lingering danger of demagoguery, which
is always available when you're talking about any kind
of sort of spontaneous or charismatic approaches to leadership.
Nevertheless, so um leaders who speak to the moment
I think are important and useful um provided that
what they say to that moment is genuinely gonna
get us closer to where we want to be
rather than, rather than seem to do that. But
actually take us further away. The other thing is
um just rethinking what we mean by leadership anyway,
sometimes leadership is what you're saying. When you mentioned
people who do mediation or who facilitate conversations, that's
actually a really interesting variety of leadership. It's much
more interesting, ironically, um much more sort of in
enthusiasm for it in the private sector and in
business um where OK, you get used to having
the big sort of dragons and what have you
who go out there and clinch the deal. But
actually what most corporations rely on is the sort
of as much co, sort of collective or group
intelligence as possible and that person who can tap
into that and unlock it and unleash it becomes
the more valuable leader than the one simply barking
instructions. So, different types of leadership and leadership that's
responsive to time and place.
Yeah, I, I mean, what I was trying to
highlight with that is that uh usually in conflict
resolution, for example, people have to respect the person
who steps in and if they respect him or
her, it's because he knows more, he has more
status, something like that or otherwise. I mean, it's
just an exact equal. And so I don't know
if it works. But the other thing I would
like to mention as well is that, for example,
in those kinds of egalitarian traditional societies, even if
there's a best hunter, for example, he might catch
the big animal, but then he comes back to
the tribe and the s to share it, to
share the meat with the other people, at least
to some extent. And also another thing that I,
I'm not sure at all if it would work
in bigger scale societies. But I if the people
who are considered the authorities or the leaders uh
start or become bullies, for example, and start mi
mistreating other people, then uh they basically get put
down and sometimes in extreme ways, like if they,
if things get really messy, they might even get
killed. So, I mean, that's perhaps another way of
more wrestling
part of anarchism. You, you get to kill the
bad leaders. Um But no, it's interesting you say
that and you sort of make the, and it's
an important distinction there. You know, again, anarchists had
this habit of looking back to these prehistorical times
or digging up this tribe that used to live
by love alone and all that sort of thing.
And we were like, well, that's nice. However, we
live in an incredibly um economically and politically complex
society. I actually think one interesting way to look
at that is that again, we've, we've talked about
how things change, evolution, history of things and the
kind of late modern moment that we're at, at
the moment there would have been a point 19th
century, early 20th, early to about the mid 20th
century where the state kind of modern organization economically,
politically, socially was such that you're quite right. You
know, the, the very notion that you'd head back
to the village and or whatever was, was patently
ridiculous. And the only sort of use it served
was to show that once and in some situations,
it is quite possible that you would have um
social orders driven by Cooper operation. Actually. Now we've
almost come back full circle. We are uh you
know, things have become so big and so globalized
and so unwieldy, unwieldy that it could actually be
the one moment where a kind of neo or
remixed or redux if you will, um sort of
version of those kind of societies becomes much more
plausible because actually the idea that these central control
spaces like the nations they are for down, they,
they're not granular enough, these problems that we're facing
are universal, but they're also incredibly localized. So suddenly,
I think we're back at a point and it's
interesting, the first thing that the new Labour government
have done on taking power in Britain is say
we need to talk far more about devolution. This
idea that actually you could go back to more
Federated models where actually people are living and doing
things on quite small scale, you know, but, but
always part of wider networks and all that sort
of thing, maybe we're actually at a point where
a new or revised version of that is more
plausible than it would have been 100 years ago.
Mhm. So I would like to ask you now
and perhaps this will also make a segue into
the last topic I want to address here today.
Having to do with the enlightenment and liberalism. How
uh because you sort of have a foot in
each of these camps, how do you look at
the relationship between history and politics?
Oh, that's that's a very good question. Um I
would try not to, to, to uh ramble too
much. Um So obviously, II, I mean, I ob
obviously I'm going to say that there's a very
strong reciprocal relation there. In fact, there are many,
many kinds of um relationship. I think history is
incredibly important to my thinking through politics and always
has been um for some of the reasons that
we've, we've touched upon. Um FOR me, it was
impossible to think of his uh politics in quite
the vacuum, in quite the entirely theorized or philosophical
way. It always felt it always felt slightly wrong.
Um Frankly, it like, um that it was just
missing too much information. So I think, why, why
history became so important to me? And I kept
going back to it because I kept trying to
escape. Um As I was sort of studying and
what have you II, I sort of first, my
first instinct was philosophy. Um And then I thought
of, OK, well, that's, that's kind of missing some
of the power play there. So I better, I
better shift towards politics. I did a stint in
the Anthropology Corridor. Honestly, in my, in my undergraduate
degree, I worked my way up and down the
humanities corridor before I finally chose a degree. But
I kept coming back to history because in some
ways, history allowed me to do all of those
things. It allowed me to look at how people
negotiate the interplay of their vested interests, which is
how I define politics. It allowed me to look
at how people conceptualize the world and how they
then choose to take actions on the basis of
that philosophy, how people sort of live together, whether
or not they're intending or planning it. That's um
that's anthropology, history. Let me do all that, but
it allowed me to do something extra which was
situate this all in context. Now again, it's sort
of interesting the historicism debates and this is a
big feature of European philosophy like Hegel Marx people
like that, that actually, you know, kind of once
we get the knack of how history is unfolding,
you know, then we can align our lives to
that and that actually will all be there the
better off for, for going in the right direction
as it were that kind of history, politics, relationships
never made any sense to me. I am one
of the one thing after another school of thought,
lots of little connections, no inevitability about it. And
context has always been really important to me because
it actually shows how even when we think things
look very continuous. Um THE the devils in the
details, actually, the small shifts that we have to
make in order to accommodate the problems that we're
encountering in the here and now make all the
difference. And therefore, it seems so odd to me
to just study the history like so many history
to this day. Uh Political philosophy textbooks will plod
you through this history of ideas, um, completely denuded
of the sort of rich kind of comings and
goings and toing and froing that were, were shaping
all these thinkers and, and their thoughts and, and
when you put those back in, um again, we've
discussed how some terminology like left and right gets
a little bit loose, a bit bit slippery when
you're really up close to it. And that's possibly
most of the joy for me. So, I mean,
I draw the very self serving conclusion that if
you study history and politics in conjunction, you can
only be an anarchist because it shows that any
taking too hard or firm a position on anything.
Um And not recognizing the sort of very many
different possibilities that might have come about the different
kind of scenarios that we could equally have easily
found ourselves living in the what ifs the maybes,
you know, all that's really rich and really exciting.
Um It goes very much against a culture that's
constantly looking for certainty and solidity. Um And that's
something I think, you know, we need to, we
need to maybe address about ourselves. Why does our
craving for certainty actually leave us facing a more
catastrophic uncertainty than if we just embrace the fact,
we cannot know and control everything all of the
time. Looking at it the other way though, of
course, um History is always a political intervention of,
you know, what, whatever you try and claim about
it, whatever um aspirations you have for objectivity as
a historian. Um And to me, that's absolutely fine
and just as exciting to do provided you just
acknowledge that frankly. Now, um in the sphere of
politics, history has been used shamelessly left and right
continually, I've gotta say the right seem to be
do it better in terms of they're able to
produce very compelling mythical histories, like histories of this
is who we are as a people. We are,
we are, we, they are them, you know, that
they're sort of a very handy technique. The left's
always been to its sort of, um, to its
credit but also to its disservice. It's always been
a little bit maybe more discerning about who the
THEMS and USS are. It's never quite managed to
pro provide the same equally compelling myth of the
people. Although it, we've seen interesting examples like, um
in Stalinist, Russia or Stalinist Soviet Union, I should
say where you do see similar type attempts to
manufacture these or the invention of a tr tradition,
the invention of our, our sort of people and,
and their identity. Um I think when you sort
of put yourself through that professional training to, I
mean, all that really means when you are a
sort of professional historian as, as I am, what
that really means is that you, you sort of
cultivate your skepticism as it were. That's essentially when
you do it sort of when that's what you
are training yourself to do. So, actually I had
a professor quite early on in my career. Tell
me, well, you'll know when you're a, a real
historian when no matter what the issue is, you
come down very firmly on the fence every time.
Um, BUT even that is a political intervention because
what that's asking us to do is wait and
diffuse for a moment. And actually that is still
a political stance. It's a political move to make.
Um And again, it's sort of maybe heading back
to what you were saying about that sort of
leadership that mediates as well as advances. It's saying,
wait, let's look around us, let's take a moment,
you know, to, to kind of see the lay
of the land and not make too many quick
decisions that are too um too limited in terms
of their understanding.
Mhm. Ok. So for the last topic, then let
me ask you, what is your take on Steven
Pinker s take on the enlightenment, liberalism and his
narrative of progressivism. And perhaps uh at some point,
we might insert here or go back to what
I put the pin on earlier. That was, that
had to do with Kropotkin and Graber and the
anthropologists. But uh gi give us perhaps a first
answer to that.
Sure. Well, um I don't know if you know,
know this, but actually the pleasure of um media.
I I chaired mediated an interview refereed. I'm not
sure what you call it with. Um Steven Steven
Pinker um not long ago and he was uh
facing anniversary from political science who was, who was
um as you might expect, uh challenging him on
his, his claim that uh actually, since from the
en the Enlightenment project was a good project and
actually far from sort of collapsing, deflating, falling on
its backside, we have continued to advance progress is
not just a myth, it's something we can unti
firely say about ourselves. And I was in the
position of chair. So I had to keep my
um mouth zipped whilst he was saying what I
consider to be quite provocative um things. But um
yeah, so on the reflection, uh so Steven Pinker,
I think actually, there's a lot to admire about
his argument mostly because I just love anyone who's
antino meum enough to, to kind of upset what's
become a kind of popular tourism, right? We uh
Stephen was working during the sort of a period
of time of eighties nineties into the two thousands.
You know, that was the sort of early part
of his career when um you know, that, that
it was the most fashionable thing to do in
the academy was laugh and dismiss and s you
know, sneer at the progress myth and how those
poor deluded Victorians have bought this ridiculous thing. And,
and obviously this completely ignored slavery, completely ignored racial
inequality, completely ignored sexual inequality and sexuality inequality. And
basically you were, it was progressive for a teeny,
tiny handful of white middle class. Um Protestant, well,
in the anglo sense, men, um and I think
it was quite refreshing for him to go. Well,
hang on a minute. No, wait, it's very easy
to bash modernity and modern life and um very
kind of seductive to look back because it wasn't
just the left that were doing it, the right
were, of course. So we had the kind of
nostalgia industry ramped up in the 19 eighties. And
don't you remember when it was all lovely? And
the Squire was at his gate and the peasants
were in the garden and it was all very
jolly never happened. But, you know, wasn't it lovely
when it did? Um So there's a boldness in
that argument and it's also, it's asking us to,
to actually kind of all right. It might not
feel great now. But what, what do facts tell
us how, how do we, how do we kind
of, how might we arrange this? And I think
he does make some, some valuable and valid points.
Um His, his sort of idea that uh we,
we so by progress, I think we ought to
qualify. He's talking as much about kind of intellectual,
moral progress, not just the fact that we can
cook things faster or, you know, we can propel
ourselves across, you know, distance fast, these are forms
of progress, but they're not really, they don't change
much. Um, IT, it takes a handful of activities
that humans like doing and just does them bigger
faster and more, which is not unhelpful, but it's
not, I suppose if you want progress in terms
of genuine, um, change, irreversible change towards having more
options, more possibilities, more ideas about who we are,
how we could live, et cetera. So that's the
kind of progress that he's got, you know, partly
in mind, I think. Um AND you know, I
think one of the key points he makes is
it is true that we generally live in less
violent cultures. It may not feel like it. And
I think certainly during the interview that I did
with him, he was willing to concede. Well, you
know, OK, I, I do think progress had been
made was being made. Um But I think we
might have to sort of re-evaluate that now, not
necessarily abandon it, but re-evaluate that because, you know,
maybe one of the criticisms you could make of
his idea was, well, what exactly do you mean
when you say there's less violence, maybe actually, OK,
we're not in the middle ages where the the
torture torture was routine execution, public executions were normal.
Um Domestic violence was standard practice even amongst so
called, you know, kind of lib in so called
liberal households, um Children, animals, whoever they were totally
expendable and we don't have that. Now, we do
spend a lot more time in certain places in
certain places, sort of talking about it, disputing it,
you know, questioning it, challenging it. We do do
that more, doesn't mean we've eradicated it but that
sort of general casual acceptance that life's violent and
you're going to get exposed to violence at some
point. Um, I think he's right to say there
has been a shift on that, but on the
other hand, maybe violence just has this wonderful ability
to keep changing shape, doesn't it? So, isn't it
a form of violence when we just let, you
know, continue with behaviors that will inevitably result in,
in a worsening climate emergency? I mean, this is
the basis of so many of the lawsuits that
we're seeing young people saying, well, it's an act
of, you know, anticipatory violence. So we might be
far more controlled in our be on the surface
again in some places. I mean, I don't think
if I went into Gaza today and said, guess
what, everyone, there's much less violence than there ever
was before. I'm not sure too many people will
be coming with me on that one. It's similar,
I could say similar going into, uh, you know,
other places have experienced horrendous conflict recently. Syria Ukraine,
obviously Myanmar right now, you know, that's a sort
of live battleground that we're not hearing sufficient about
really, um, you know, by
the way, on that point on violence, let me
just have because a couple of years ago I
have on the show Philippe Du with a historian
from Australia. And he wrote a book titled The
Darker Angels of Our Nature. That was a response
to Steven Pinker take on violence. And he, he
has very good points on that book. Uh Of
course, I can reproduce all of them here. But
if you are like that, we still have slavery
and there's an argument to be made that not
in terms of percentage, but in terms of raw
numbers, perhaps we have more people enslaved nowadays than
we have when, even when slavery was legal. And
then he also points to how the internet facilitates
certain types of violence, like for example, sex trafficking.
So, I mean, those are just two examples but
uh I guess that Steven Pinker doesn't uh I,
I mean, doesn't consider that uh th those examples
and others enough or doesn't take them seriously enough.
I'm not sure.
I think, I mean, ii I do, I think
that it's a serious flaw in the argument if
you're going to claim an overall, which he is
an overall quantitative reduction proportionally speaking, um in the
amount of violence. Um So the, the, the raw
numbers thing I think he would contest by saying,
well, you've got to look at it proportionally. Um
I also think that, you know, his argument would
be, well, yes, but the very fact we're sitting
here condemning the fact that I think the figure
is around about 45 million people still in what
you would consider a state of slavery today. Many
of them women and Children through, as you mentioned,
the sex trafficking and what have you. Um Again,
I think he'd say, well, that was going on
in the past too, but we, we were much
less concerned. No one was concerned. It wasn't a
problem. You weren't having a moral conversation about slavery,
you know, 500 years ago, like you are now
now as a historian, I'm not, I'm just, I'm
not that, that, to me feels too linear. I
think that we have this wonderful sense that we,
it's, it's, to me it's a fall, it's a,
a fallen ascent narrative. So we fell from Eden
and then we've been gradually clawing our way um
back up and it's a very standard way of
narrating history. I think again, it's this wonderful ability
we have to say, oh, well, like, like the
argument um that no one was an individual until
modernity. Um And then, and then, and then we
all became individuals and we had states of mind
and feelings and all that sort of thing. It's
not true. I mean, people who lived in very
close tribal, you know, kind of communities that doesn't
mean they had absolutely no sense of being, you
know, or, or knowing when they'd been hurt or
when they'd been betrayed or when they'd been lied
to, even if they didn't necessarily consider themselves a
self and do lots of self therapy or self
care or whatever. So, I think it's really dangerous
to, to, to do anything along the lines of
saying, you know, talking about what people were or
weren't aware of.
And, but by the way, on that point as
well, because particularly in enlightenment. Now, the subtitle I
think is something like reason, science progress, I mean,
the, the, the idea that, uh, uh, I'm not
sure if he's exactly making that argument. But the,
I, but it sounds like as if reason and
science appeared in the enlightenment and before that, there
was basically no reason and basically, no science said
that's completely untrue because I mean, in terms of
the science, at the very, very least you have
to, uh, admit that in the, uh, in the
Muslim world during the European dark ages or middle
ages, at the very least you have brought to
science there and they were doing something similar to
science. And I mean, and the reason part, the
reason part for me is just if he is
making that argument, it's, it's just silly.
No, I, you're completely right. Um, I suppose what
he's doing and it brings us right back actually
very neatly to our kind of opening conversations and
again, this notion of war, what do we mean
by, by anarchism and, and you know, kind of
the, the sort of uh where do you start
in history? Questions? So it all sort of comes
together in a, in a beautiful symphony. I think
what he's saying really is that um what the
enlightenment does, I mean, is actually it's a formalization,
it's an organization process. So suddenly off the back
of that, you can sort of trace things like,
well, where do we find the roots of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights? So I suppose if
you're looking at ways where certain ideas, certain practices,
certain values, intellectual, moral, et cetera, got formalized into
sort of what we would now call kind of
any sort of globalized legislation. In so far as
that is ever effective, we have seen very dram
dramatically the limits of things like the International Criminal
Court to deal with problems like Ukraine with problems,
like what's happening in Gaza right now. Um However,
you know, I suppose what he's saying is I
would say hi, his, his progress narrative has behind
it, a thinking of, of global legislative practice now,
which may be that he says, well, there could
have been people doing brilliant things, but that didn't
turn into a rule book for the human race.
And I'd say, well, OK, II, I would accept
that differentiation. I'd still question um I think that
in terms of, you know, that argument that I,
I, I'd still, I'd still question how universal that
rulebook is. How effective it is. Um, BUT you
can't deny that it does exist and it came
into existence at a time when, um, that sort
of our globalized nature of our life was becoming
more, more formalized from that point on again, not
to say that people weren't traveling, weren't encountering each
other, weren't doing interesting things. Um, BUT I don't
think that's clear. I mean, I'm sort of interpreting
possibly too heavily. Who knows? Um, And I think
you're right. I think that we have suffered from
a serious lack of being more curious about the
histories that lie outside of the history capital, h
sort of thing. Um And so I think there's
a salutary lesson for all uh political scientists out
there, go back to the past but look laterally.
Uh I, I mean, at the very least I
think people uh there's a strong argument to be
made that perhaps the sort of way presents history
in these books in the Better Angels of Our
Nature and Enlightenment now is very Euro centuries. II.
I think that's a good argument to be made.
But uh but then let me just run perhaps
two or three criticisms that I have uh about
his work through, through you to see what do
you think about them. So, I, I mean, uh
f first of all, uh I respect him a
lot as a cognitive scientist, as a psychologist, as
a linguist. But nowadays, after spending years talking with
political scientists, historians and anthropologists trying to address each
of the points that he makes across his books,
which are a ton of them because he covers
a lot, a lot of ground. And so it's
very, very hard to evaluate all of what he
says there. But, uh I, I don't think III
I no longer take his, let's say, takes on
political science and economics and anthropology seriously at all.
So, but, but, but another uh the three points
I was going to make are the first one
I think that he is very dismissive of people
who were actually part of the enlightenment. But just
because they have ideas that he doesn't like, he
says they were not really part of the enlightenment,
like for example, Nietzsche, oh he was a romantic
and then I rationalist. So he was not really
part of the enlightenment. Uh Mars all because the
enlightenment has to be capitalist. He was a communist
or a socialist or socialism and communism, not part
of the enlightenment. And then perhaps people, other people
with other kinds of political thoughts, other political thinkers
that would be perhaps more or less in favor
of progressive is more conservative or something like that.
Or maybe he would put them aside as well,
but at the very least Nietzsche Marx and some
other people like that. He is extremely critical of
them in their books. And uh iii, I guess
that if you would ask him directly, you would
say that they were not real enlightened people or
something like that. Uh And, and then, I mean,
the another point is uh uh oh my God,
I lost by Rena for now. But uh II,
I mean, perhaps respond to that when and then
I will
respond to that whilst um you, you to work
on the, the other points. So I think you're
absolutely right. Again, um, we talked about this earlier
or my, my sort of sense that history is
always a political intervention. I do think there's a
strong element of that in what Stephen Pink is
trying to do. I think he's almost, it's more
of ac a rescue job for a particular version
of the enlightenment that led to a kind of
liberal world order which he sees as the most
sort of sensible, um as liberals tend to do
in their liberal way. Um The, the, it's the
most sensible, it's most reasonable. It's the least bad
of all, all, all the options if you must
have. Um, LEADERSHIP cos it's amazing how many liberals
will grudgingly, sort of, you know, kind of shuffle
their feet. Look and say, well, yeah, yeah, law
government. It sucks. But it's, it's, it's necessary and
it's sensible. So I think you're completely right. The
enlightenment, actually, we tend to reduce it down to
this. You know, here are all the bits that
we most recognize, um, and are most useful for
us right now and of course, it wasn't, I
mean, it just wasn't like that. I mean, if
you want to say anything about the enlightenment at
all, was that a large outpouring of, of ideas
about how things worked, how the world worked? Nietzsche?
I mean, like the, um the relationship, the romanticism
is really interesting. It's always positioned again as opposed
to the enlightenment. I would say it was fully
a part of it because a romantic romantic thinkers
no less than the rationalists had a theory about
how the world worked. And on the basis of
that theory, how you could then operate within it.
Now, their theory was there isn't, you know, a
one big truth. We can note we're always inventing
that truth. Someone like Nietzsche says, fine. Well, if
we're gonna invent that truth, let's really invent that
truth. That's not dilly dally, let's not wring our
hands. Let's not be apologetic. Let's invent the world
then. And in some ways Nietzsche does not lead
in a straight line to fascism, he was simply
making a kind of um philosophical argument. Well, if
the world is so much to an extent, a
projection of our imagination that we convince or compel
people into believing, then what would that look like
if we actually acted like that? It's a thought
experiment.
Yeah. O OK. So the two other points that
just came to my mind is the first one
I think that it doesn't take seriously enough critiques
of capitalism. So II, I think that the, this
misses to easily it takes from socialists, takes from
communists and I mean, whatever, III I, OK, I
wouldn't say whatever, but many or many, many, many,
many of the criticisms that people would have to
make about capitalism and about things like even uh
uh uh economic inequality and its effects. I don't
think that it takes it seriously enough and then,
and perhaps partly related to that point. And also
something that you mentioned briefly earlier. Uh I mean,
at a certain point, it gets a bit weird
to me when people say that. OK, so we
have this problem, we have violence, for example, in
that particular kind of way. And then most of
the time his response is OK, we have that,
but in the past, we have more and it
seems that he's always making that kind of argument
that at a certain point, I I'm no longer
sure if he's just saying that or if he's
just outright this missing uh the point that people
are making because if that's something that still exists,
it's still a problem. But sometimes I'm no longer
sure if he even considers it really a problem
just because we have a apparently lower levels of
it now than we did in the past. So,
um so the first point is that he doesn't
take seriously the uh critiques of, of capitalism. I
mean, I think my answer to both would be,
I find reading Stephen's work. Um Unlike you, I'm
like I said, II, I enjoy many aspects of
the boldness of the, of the argument. Full stop.
I'm glad it exists if you will. Um However,
and obviously, full respect for his scientific work and
also always in the spirit of um history being
a political intervention of some kind or another. I
find um reading Steven's work a kind of wonderful
mixture of idealism and really hardcore realism and maybe
that's partly what's at play here. So, um I
think there's this quite idealistic view that a lot
of those sentiments in the enlightenment and the, this
notion that she would make decisions based on rationality
that she would organize affairs a occur according to
um free planning informed by, you know, a factual
understanding of the situation at hand. All these are
sort of uh uh are not unreasonable things to
sort of, um to, to believe or to want
or to want to see. And I think a
lot of it, sort of philosophy's motivation is worrying
perhaps more than he'd like to, um more than
he'd like to admit that that some of those
things just as values, not necessarily as realities, but
some of those things as values are under threat.
I think there's a real realist in Stephen too,
in the sense that he says, well, I'm not
gonna talk to you about communism or anything like
that. I, I think capital, we have to deal
with capitalism because that's what we, we've got and
actually capitalism sort of well managed, sort of polite
capitalism, the kind of Adam Smith style capitalism, which
never actually existed because it's never the sort of
Adam Smith account of capitalism or, you know, sort
of free market, I should say, or free trade,
uh, never takes into account the fact that you're
never starting from a position of free trade. You
always are starting from a position of your second
point, you know, massively powerful vested interest. So we
gonna skew that competition. So we're never gonna get
to the situation where we are genuinely in a
free competition. That's, that's an, that's an actual historical
time and place right here right now problem that
um, no amount of enlighten theorizing has really dealt
with that, you know, and, and I suppose what
you're saying is actually, there's a wonderful sense of,
we can all be very excited about the promise
of the enlightenment. But what it never really did
was confront the fact of power, which isn't, doesn't,
isn't always, doesn't always yield to reason or um
rationality by definition. But it's nevertheless a fact and
it's nevertheless an active fact, you don't need to
be a wild intellectual to see what power unchecked
does. Um And intellectuals can sometimes actually be so,
um enamored of, of these sort of clever ways
around problems that they realize that actually, you know,
sometimes you do have to give an answer to
the brute force question, namely power is not gonna
go away because you show it all how unreasonable
it is. Turkeys don't vote for Christmas, right? No
matter how well you make the case. Um So
I think there's an element of that which ma
which does I agree with you severely undermine um
the overall project that we've come this way just
by sheer sort of small steps, gradualism, reasonable advance.
And the gradualism I think is the other aspect
which is why you don't get satisfying answers to
your question of. But inequality still exists if it's
not, if we can prove that it's not rational
to do this for the human race and we
can prove it's perfectly reasonable to rearrange resources so
that it's no longer necessary. Why do we still
have it? And then Steven's saying, ah, yes, but
we have much proportionally less of it, even if
in raw numbers, we actually have more.
And it's not just that we still have it,
but even more that it tends to be very
dismissive of the social, political and other kinds of
effects that economic inequality has in across different so
society, I mean, at a certain point in enlightenment
now, it seems that it just uh brings up
studies about how apparently if people perceive, even if
it's a very, very, very high levels of economic
inequality as fair, it doesn't matter. And I, I
mean, for me that doesn't make any sense because
economic inequality has social and political effects regardless of
people, uh looking at it as being more or
less fair. So,
um, no, it's a good point. And again, I
think it's this sort of, actually there's a very
humanistic element in his, in his thinking, in the
sense that um if the empirical person, if you
will, the person you ask says, oh no, I,
I don't feel things are unfair. Um, AND even
though you're looking at the stats and comparing them
with what they could be going, are you sure?
Um, YOU know, that, that's, uh, I think, I
think I would give credibility to taking that person
and their feeling seriously, but not exclusively. So you're
right to say that people and how they feel
about situations, if they don't feel that they're living
a horrible life, then frankly, thank God, you know,
sort of that, that's, that's a mercy because we,
I don't want anyone to, you know, you don't
want anyone to sort of be sitting there feeling
like that. But at the same time, you know,
there's, there's a line between that and having your
head in the sand over, over things. So it's
that sort of push pull between trying to respect
how people feel and where they're at and then
that sort of very gently trying to kind of
change things and, and, and again, remember it's always
a kind of act of authority for anyone to
say, well, you might feel that way, but I
can assure you it's not like that the best,
you know. And I think again, that's what someone
like Stephen Pink will be trying to avoid that.
If you're gonna change things, you need to bring
people with you, even if that slows down your
journey. So I think he tends to avoid, not
necessarily because their reasoning is incorrect, but in terms
of whether it's, um, I mean, he's a sort
of a brilliant psychologist. So there'd be a degree
to which he's like, well, how do people change
their minds about things? How do you make people
want things even when they don't realize they want
them, if you point to those people who are
talking about extreme differences, which would be massive upheaval,
um People tend to not buy into that as
much as if you say. Well, let's start small.
What kind of, all right, you're generally happy. But
is there anything you've noticed in your life which,
which is upsetting you or ranking you but start
from there? And that's your departure point? Um WHICH
does, doesn't actually mean. And again, this is maybe
why those history books he does are generally for
large popular public audiences. They're not the kind of
technical books or technical monographs or articles that he
would produce as a scientist. So there's always a
degree of which he's saying there's a case to
be made that the enlightenment didn't fail and you
know, that we, um, we should still buy into
its values and that, in the process of making
that argument, I think what he's also trying to
do is say, well, let's save those values because
actually they're under threat right now. And in order
to do that, I'm gonna tell you 90% of
what you think you already know. And then just
a AAA small enough twist to, to, to, to
make you kind of come with me on this.
That would be, that would be totally my, my
guess. But I did used to teach rhetoric. Um
So possibly I'm just putting a rhetorical spin on
this which doesn't exist, who knows? So,
so I, I was looking at the um do
you, we just a couple more minutes to reply
to the last point I made, which I can
repeat if you want or? OK. So uh the
last point was, was basically me saying that I
think is I'm not sure at a certain point
if he takes seriously the fact that certain kinds
of issues like violence of different kinds still exist
because he's always going back to the argument that,
oh but uh but before the, the, the levels
were higher in, in, in ancient time, the levels
were higher because uh and something that he keeps
repeating is that uh it, it seems to him
that the progressives do not like pro but I
don't think that just because someone is pointing out
a problem that we still have regardless of it
being, uh, at lower or higher levels than before
that they are dismissing a progressivism or they don't
like progressivism. Well, they just want to be negative.
They just pointing out a problem, a problem that
still exists. And sometimes, I don't know, it seems
to me that he's too dismissive of, uh, people
pointing out those problems because it seems that, uh
it takes it as being an attack to the
kind of argument he presents in his book. So.
Well, I think the thing with progressives is that,
um, I mean, I think actually I'd agree with
them to a point and then disagree at a
point. If you're a progressive, your job by definition
is to be that awkward person who wants to
move things forward and that's genuinely your, your job
and you wouldn't be doing it right if you
just went. Oh, yes, pat on our backs. We've
all done excellently jolly good feet up everyone. Right.
So there is an extent to which this is
kind of a necessary friction to have. And actually
he's doing, he's almost doing the progressive course of
favor by pushing back at it a bit because
if you, if you want, if you want to
kind of propel things forward and um you know,
sort of, you, you, you know, that, that you
sort of, you're, you're kind of saying things aren't
good enough as they are. So, you know, it
is, it is a sort of creative friction, I
think to, to kind of, to kind of have
that argument. Um I, again, I think this comes
back to his notion of gradualism and, and again,
I, I would say it's sort of like the
progress is almost, you have a license to almost
go too far. You, you do, by definition, you
need to be a little bit utopian in your
aspirations. Like this isn't good enough, we can do
better. We should. And that's a driving force. It
drives people forward and then you can have a
sort of second flank of people saying, oh, well,
you know, let's be, let's calm down, let's not
go too, too fast, all that sort of thing.
Um And I suppose the change that you're wanting
to happen lands in between, you know, so the
progressives are almost pushing further, you know, it's the
lever, the leverage theory of persuasion, right? If I
have a really crazy goal, a really out there
goal, I need to use a lot more force
to get a tiny bit of movement. Um Because
I suppose the the implication there may be Steven
suspects as William James did that. Um SORT of
social psychology if you like uh William James used
to call it the ancient Mass and that the
best you can hope for as a progressive is
you stain the ancient mass just a drop, just
a drop and like a drop, it gradually infuses
very gradually until you can slightly change the chemistry
of that ancient mass. And I wonder if a
similar idea is at play here. So I don't
think it's a good enough argument really to say,
oh, but it's, but there's proportionally less, it's not
a great argument. It's a true one. Um, BUT
it's maybe not, it's maybe allowing other people to
be aspirational and taking the position of someone who's
being quote unquote, a realist with the hope that
that conversation between our wildest dreams of our best
versions of ourselves and what we've got at the
moment, something in between those two poles or axes
um may be the direction we can shift ourselves
gradually towards.
Yeah. Ju just to give a quick example of
something I heard from him that illustrates what I
was trying to convey earlier. I mean, I watched
a video of him uh in the Q and
A and uh you, I'm not sure what the
question was exactly. But at a certain point, he
said something like, oh, people who are part of
progressive movements, even if they become obsolete, they have
to invent new problems to stay relevant. And they
gave the example of f and they gave the
example of feminism in the most developed countries. And
I was like, really if feminist is obsolete by
now, uh It, it seems a bit silly to
me.
Yeah. Again, it's, it's a confronting position, um, for
him to, for him to take, but it's almost,
um, again, it's almost, I, I'm not sure I'll
say that was deliberate provo provocation. Um, IT, it
might be nice to think that it was. Um,
BUT I, yeah, I think there's a sense to
which, what David Pinker rep. Uh, David, sorry, Steven
Pinker represents is an attempt to say, um, you
know, it's an attempt to kind of, it's kind
of a conservative position that's not, that's not traditionally
conservative. It's almost a t an attempt to kind
of reclaim conservatism towards something that actually progressives still
aren't gonna agree with, but they could work with
far better. So instead of a fictional, the people
and the organic community, he's saying, look through reason
and time and being gradual and patience, you know,
we've done a darn good job. Thank you. And
it is our job. People like you and me
to say it's not enough for us. Yeah.
So let's perhaps uh end on that point because
we're already going over, over time here. So, uh
Sophie just before we go, would you like to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Oh, well, I mean, so I have uh several
books um which are available through a number of
book retailers. In fact, my, my first book is
open access with the Australian National University Press that
is all about um the history of history and
different ways you can use history as a political
tool. And that's the histories of Rafael Samuel, portrait
of a people's historian. Um I have a book
on the art of everyday anarchy. Um And you
can find that through various bookshops or ideally through
uh libraries, particularly college libraries. My next book is
coming out with Oxford University Press, probably beginning of
next year and that's looking at activist politics during
the Cold War. Um And then I have a
book about a new philosophy of liberty that will
be forthcoming in early 2025. Um You can also
find some videos of me talking about anarchism, various
kinds forms, varieties. Um And they can all be
found via the Institute of Art and Ideas um
channel or um found on youtube.
Great. So I will be leaving some links to
that in the description and Sophie. Thank you very
much again for the conversation. It was very informative
and fascinating. So, thank you so much for coming
on the show. Thank you. Hi guys. Thank you
for watching this interview. Until the end. If you
liked it, please share it, leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by N Lights learning and development. Then differently
check the website at N lights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and paypal supporters. Perego Larson,
Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of
Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim
Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the
Met Robert Wine in NAI Z Mar Nevs calling
in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for
Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her ma J and Lain
Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes Mark Smith.
Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman
Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba,
Adam Hunt, Pavla Stassi na Me, Gary G Almansa
Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall,
Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franka Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, The Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, bangalore Fists, Larry Dey
Junior, old Ebon Starry. Michael Bailey. Then spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis
Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate
Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz. And Nick Golden and
to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si, Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.